Responsibility overhaul (#88)
Intralogistics-2X-LIF/Layout-Interchange-Format: LIF.md

# LIF - Layout Interchange Format

## Definition of a format of path and behavior layouts for exchange between parties to integrate mobile robots and a fleet control system.

## Version 2.0.0 - September 2026

# Abstract

> The following embodiment describes an interchange format for one or more layouts (e.g., collections of edges, nodes, and stations). By means of this interchange format, an integrator of mobile robots and fleet control systems will be able to define and transfer a layout (or layouts) definition.

Author: "(third-party)" was removed from everywhere I saw it when working on this. To not balloon this PR any more, after it is done, I'll go back and perform another commit removing it from any further places in the document, assuming you guys all agree.

> This document represents a non-binding approach. Whoever uses it must ensure the correct application in the specific case. It is influenced by the state of the art at the time of the respective edition, in particular the VDA5050 interface definition. Ascribing to the suggestions described herein does not absolve parties of the responsibility for their own actions. No text in this document claims completeness nor provides exact interpretation of the existing legal provisions. The contents of this document must not replace the study of the relevant directives, laws, and regulations. Furthermore, the special features of the respective products as well as their different possible applications must be considered. In this respect, all parties act at their own risk. Any liability of the VDMA and those involved in the development or application of the suggestions is excluded.

Author: oxford comma is best comma

| --- | --- |
| deadlock | A situation where two or more devices are awaiting one another in a circular fashion, resulting in a system that is unable to exit this state and continue regular operation. Example: Mobile robot A is waiting on mobile robot B to get out of the way, but mobile robot B is also waiting on mobile robot A to do the same. |
| facility | The facility in which the mobile robot system is used. The facility can consist of several levels. The facility could be made up by several LIF files from multiple mobile robot integrators. The facility is controlled by one (third-party) fleet control system. |

> | fleet control provider | The provider of a fleet control system which must respect at minimum the capabilities, limitations, and requirements defined in the LIF.

Author: ```suggestion
| fleet control provider | The provider of a fleet control system which must respect at minimum the capabilities, limitations, and requirements defined in the LIF. |
```

| integrator | An integrator is the party responsible for supplying an integrated solution of mobile robots and fleet control software to a customer. The integrator may or may not be the manufacturer or supplier of the mobile robots and/or the fleet control software. |
| layout | A collection of nodes, edges, and stations. A layout represents a level of a facility or a part of a level of a facility. |
| level | A level of a facility that is used by the mobile robot systems. |

> | mobile robot provider | A provider of mobile robots, with some or all of the mobile robots' capabilities, limitations, or requriements defined in the LIF.

Author: ```suggestion
| mobile robot provider | A provider of mobile robots, with some or all of the mobile robots' capabilities, limitations, or requriements defined in the LIF. |
```

# 3 Foreword

> The Layout Interchange Format (LIF) was defined at Verband Deutscher Maschinen- und Anlagenbau e. V. Fachverband Fördertechnik und Intralogistik (VDMA). Proposals for changes to the standard format are to be submitted to the VDMA and may be adopted in a future version.

Author: This was some weird deutchlish artifact from the VDMA lawyers' pass previously. Let's change it slightly and see what they do, out of curiosity.

# 4 Aim of the Document

> This document describes the LIF, its purpose, and examples of how to use it. This document does not describe any logical processes that a fleet control system must implement to interpret the data contained in the LIF.

Author: bestest comma

# 5 Aim of the LIF

The objective of the Layout Interchange Format is to standardize a way for the definition of mobile robot layouts to be presented toward a fleet control system provider or other parties.

The first primary goal is to complement the VDA5050 interface’s goal of facilitating decoupling between mobile robot manufacturers and fleet control system providers. It uses the same terminology and much of the same structure as the VDA5050 interface.

The LIF described in this document is intended to map a common set of necessary information, as explicitly and unambiguously as possible, to enable a fleet control system to steer/navigate one or more mobile robots. The LIF contains information on how mobile robots can interact with their environment and navigate inside of a layout.

## 5.1 Requirements

> * The LIF concept, standard, and definition must always be compatible with the current status, terminology, and developments of the latest VDA5050 interface definition existing at the time of the LIF's release.

Author: ```suggestion
* The LIF concept and definition must always be compatible with the current status, terminology, and developments of the latest VDA5050 interface definition existing at the time of the LIF's release.
```
Avoid the calling the LIF a "standard" for legal CYA reasons.

* A single LIF file may only contain layouts from one mobile robot provider.
* A single LIF file may contain multiple layouts for multiple mobile robot types of one mobile robot provider.
* A fleet control system must be able to accept multiple LIF files from multiple mobile robot providers for one facility.
* The LIF must not preclude the inclusion of mobile robots with different levels of autonomy.

## 5.2 Further Assumptions
* The communication between the fleet control system and the mobile robot corresponds to the latest VDA5050 interface definition at the time of the LIF's publication. Best efforts are made to preserve backwards compatibility between versions of VDA5050 where able.

> * The mobile robot provider or system integrator will also provide the fleet control system with the mobile robots' factsheet per the VDA5050 specification, which will contain information about mobile robot geometry, kinematics, and other "capabilities of the mobile robot" such as which actions it may perform.

Author: ```suggestion
* The mobile robot provider or integrator will also provide the fleet control system with the mobile robots' factsheet per the VDA5050 specification, which will contain information about mobile robot geometry, kinematics, and other "capabilities of the mobile robot" such as which actions it may perform.
```

## 5.3 LIF Limitations

> The LIF does not describe any specific logical processes by which a mobile robot or fleet control system must perform its tasks. This includes, but is not limited to, the handling of route planning, traffic management, intersections of multiple mobile robots from the same of different mobile robot providers or integrators, interaction with stationary equipment, and so forth. The LIF is merely a definition of what a mobile robot is capable of doing, and where. Section 7.2, Import and Processing of the LIF File by the (Third-party) Fleet Control System, goes into further detail.

Author: ```suggestion
The LIF does not describe any specific logical processes by which a mobile robot or fleet control system must perform its tasks. This includes, but is not limited to, the handling of route planning, traffic management, intersections of multiple mobile robots from the same of different mobile robot providers or integrators, interaction with stationary equipment, and so forth. The LIF is merely a definition of a layout, and what and where a fleet controller may instruct a mobile robot to do within the facility.
```

> The LIF does not affect, nor is it affected by, different localization technologies that mobile robots may use, nor does it contain any information pertaining to localization methods.

Author: ```suggestion
```

The LIF does not define by what means or at which points in time it is to be communicated between involved parties.

# 6 LIF Format

A JSON structure is used for the exchange format. JSON strings must conform to the RFC 8259 description for object notation. Keys must be strings and values must be a valid JSON data type (string, integer, float, object, array, boolean, or null). The data is case sensitive.

The JSON structure allows for future extension of LIF with additional parameters.

# 7 Responsibiliites of the Supplier of a LIF

> Often a LIF is produced by a mobile robot supplier, and then is imported into a facility's fleet control system by the integrator. While the LIF is primarily intended for consumption by a fleet control system, the LIF itself is merely a declarative definition of some or all of the capabilities, limitations, and requirements for mobile robots that it describes. There is no provision for or against the generation or consumption of the LIF by design tools, fleet control software, mobile robot software, or otherwise.

Author: ```suggestion
Often a LIF is produced by a mobile robot supplier, and then is imported into a facility's fleet control system by the integrator. While the LIF is primarily intended for consumption by a fleet control system, the LIF itself is merely a definition of the layouts of a facility, and the manner in which the mobile robots may be orchestrated by a fleet control system within them. There is no provision favoring or precluding the generation or consumption of the LIF by design tools, fleet control software, mobile robot software, or otherwise.
```

> Regardless of the party who created it, the creator of a LIF file is responsible for the accuracy and viability of its contents, including but not limited to ensuring that the capabilities, limitations, and requirements of the corresponding mobile robots are accurate, that the geometries contained therein are viable and routeable, and that the phsyical areas which any mobile robots traverse with respect to the LIF's definitions are appropriate for mobile robots to occupy and/or pass through.

Author: ```suggestion
Regardless of the party who created it, the creator of a LIF file is responsible for the accuracy and viability of its contents, including but not limited to ensuring that the capabilities, limitations, and requirements of the corresponding mobile robots are accurate, that the geometries contained therein are viable and routable, that the physical areas which any mobile robots traverse with respect to the LIF's definitions are appropriate for mobile robots to occupy and/or pass through, and that all safety-relevant standards and requirements are complied with.
```

The LIF is not all-encompasing. Discussions between the integrator and providers may still be required.

> The following section describes one of the normal exchange of a LIF file:

Author: ```suggestion
The following section describes a common example of LIF file exchange:
```

1. Export of the LIF file by the provider of the mobile robots.
2. Import and processing of the LIF file by the fleet control system.
3. Further exports of the LIF file and imports into the fleet control system, such as incremental updates or changes.

![](assets/fig7_1-1.png)

> ## 7.1 Export of the LIF File by the Provider or Integrator of the Mobile Robots

Author: ```suggestion
## 7.1 Export of the LIF File by the Integrator or Provider of the Mobile Robots
```

> The planning and definition of the layout is often done by the provider or integrator of the mobile robots (e.g., by means of a planning or design tool). The mobile robot provider or integrator should plan the layout in compliance with safety relevant standards (e.g., minimum distances, speed reduction on certain edges, etc.) while considering the analysis of the envelope of the mobile robots.

Author: ```suggestion
The planning and definition of the layout is often done by the integrator or provider of the mobile robots (e.g., by means of a planning or design tool).
```

After the mobile robot provider or integrator has physically tested and verified that the layout can be followed by the mobile robots in compliance with the safety-relevant standards, the mobile robot provider or integrator should present the layout to the fleet control system by means of a LIF file via data transfer.

The elements that are exported into the LIF file must include:

* The collection of all pathway nodes and any node-specific actions.
* The collection of all edges between these nodes and any edge-specific actions.

> * The collection of stations for which the mobile robot may perform actions.

Author: ```suggestion
* The collection of stations with which the mobile robot may interact.
```

## 7.2 Import and Processing of the LIF File by the Fleet Control System

> The fleet control system may import the LIF to understand how a mobile robot or mobile robots can move on the given layout or layouts, as well as the actions that can be performed at the various places within it.

Author: ```suggestion
The fleet control system may import the LIF to understand how a mobile robot or mobile robots can move on the given layout or layouts, as well as the actions that can be performed within them.
```

> The fleet control system is responsible for the logic ensuring that all commands sent to a mobile robot or mobile robots based on information from a LIF file never result in conflicting commands with other mobile robots also under its control, including but not limited to examples such as commanding two mobile robots to drive through an intersection at the same time, creating deadlocks between multiple mobile robots, and so forth. The fleet control system is further responsible for ensuring that any actions it sends to mobile robots that are not explicitly defined as required for a node or edge in the LIF are indeed valid—this may require further coordination and communication between the system integrator, fleet control system provider, and the mobile robot provider. It is always the responsibility of the fleet control system to ensure it has all of the information required to make such determinations.

Author: ```suggestion
The fleet control system is responsible for the logic ensuring that all commands sent to a mobile robot or mobile robots based on information from a LIF file never result in conflicting commands with other mobile robots also under its control, including but not limited to examples such as commanding two mobile robots to drive through an intersection at the same time, creating deadlocks between multiple mobile robots, and so forth. The fleet control system is further responsible for ensuring that any actions it sends to mobile robots that are not explicitly defined as required for a node or edge in the LIF are indeed valid—this may require further coordination and communication between the integrator, fleet control system provider, and the mobile robot provider. It is always the responsibility of the fleet control system to ensure it has all of the information required to make such determinations.
```

* Attributes and parameters required for the management of the mobile robots:
  + Disposition of the mobile robots
  + Battery management of the mobile robots
* Communication with the system periphery (e.g., automatic stations, elevators, doors, etc.)
* Connection to higher-level systems (e.g., material flow computers, warehouse management systems, etc.)
* Expansion to include specific elements of fleet control system

## 7.3 Further Updates and Exports of the LIF File

> When any changes are to be made to either a layout or mobile robot behavior which could be reflected in the LIF, a new LIF should be created and supplied to all consuming parties. It is the responsibility of the LIF creator to inform the fleet control system or provider that changes have been made. It is the responsibility of the fleet control integrator or provider to re-process the new LIF file, incorporating any changes, and then to notify mobile robot provider or integrator that this has been completed. Then and only then are the changes to the system complete and ready for use, and the affected mobile robots may resume operation. Some of these steps may or may not be automated, such as by a fleet control system triggering a vehicle to perform a map update via the means described in VDA5050.

Author: ```suggestion
When any changes are to be made to either a layout or mobile robot behavior which require an update to the information in the LIF, a new LIF should be created and supplied to all consuming parties. It is the responsibility of the LIF creator to inform the fleet control system provider or integrator that changes have been made. It is the responsibility of the fleet control provider or integrator to re-process the new LIF file, incorporating any changes, and then to notify mobile robot provider or integrator that the fleet control system has done so. Then and only then are the changes to the system complete and ready for use, and the affected mobile robots may resume operation. Some of these steps may or may not be automated.
```

> When any changes are to be made to either a layout or mobile robot behavior which could be reflected in the LIF, a new LIF should be created and supplied to all consuming parties. It is the responsibility of the LIF creator to inform the fleet control system or provider that changes have been made. It is the responsibility of the fleet control system integrator or provider to re-process the new LIF file, incorporating any changes, and then to notify mobile robot provider or integrator that this has been completed. Then and only then are the changes to the system complete and ready for use, and the affected mobile robots may resume operation. Some of these steps may or may not be automated, such as by a fleet control system triggering a vehicle to perform a map update via the means described in VDA5050.

Author: ```suggestion
When any changes are to be made to either a layout or mobile robot behavior which could be reflected in the LIF, a new LIF should be created and supplied to all consuming parties. It is the responsibility of the LIF creator to inform the fleet control system or provider that changes have been made. It is the responsibility of the fleet control integrator or provider to re-process the new LIF file, incorporating any changes, and then to notify mobile robot provider or integrator that this has been completed. Then and only then are the changes to the system complete and ready for use, and the affected mobile robots may resume operation. Some of these steps may or may not be automated, such as by a fleet control system triggering a vehicle to perform a map update via the means described in VDA5050.
```

> **Attention:** Changing a mobile robot’s behavior without also updating the LIF file consumed by the fleet control system leads to inconsistencies—potentially harmful or destructive ones. Likewise, a fleet control system provider or integrator that changes information gained from the LIF (e.g., change of layout) without confirming the mobile robot provider or integrator has also implemented these changes, removes and adopts all liability from the mobile robot provider and integrator, and can lead to potentially destructive or harmful outcomes.

Author: ```suggestion
**Attention:** Changing a mobile robot’s behavior without also updating the LIF file consumed by the fleet control system leads to inconsistencies—potentially harmful or destructive ones. Likewise, a fleet control system provider or integrator that changes information gained from the LIF (e.g., change of layout) without confirming the mobile robot provider or integrator has also implemented these changes, adopts all liability from original LIF creator, and can lead to potentially harmful or destructive outcomes.
```

| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| { |  |  |  |
| originId |  | string | Unique identifier for this origin. |
| *originDescriptor* |  | string | A user-defined, human-readable name or descriptor. (e.g., "Hall B: Floors 1, 2, and 3"). This shall not be used for logical purposes. |
| layouts[layout] |  | array of JSON-object | A collection of layouts within the facility, all sharing the same origin. |
| } |  |  |  |

> #### 8.3.3.1 Best Practices for Defining an Origin

Author: This doesn't 100% overlap with the responsibility question, and could have been a separate commit, but it is very much related to making the entire responsibility and flow much clearer/cleaner, so I put it in.

> The origin object is meant to be coordinated and consistently applied across all LIFs of a facility by the responsible integrator and all parties which consume the LIF. Sharing an originId implies that the origin's coordinate system, including its rotation and scale, matches others with the same originId. If this is not the case different originIds should be utilized. Any layouts which may overlap or interact with one another should always belong to the same origin wherever possible.

Author: ```suggestion
The origin object is meant to be coordinated and consistently applied across all LIFs of a facility by the responsible integrator and all parties which consume the LIF. Sharing an `originId` implies that the origin's coordinate system, including its rotation and scale, matches others with the same `originId`. If this is not the case, different `originId`s should be utilized. Any layouts which may overlap or interact with one another should always belong to the same origin wherever possible.
```

> The LIF does not specify how two layouts from different origins, whether defined in the same LIF file or from multiple LIF files, may overlap or relate to one another.

Author: ```suggestion
The LIF does not specify how two layouts from different origins, whether defined in the same LIF file or from multiple LIF files, may overlap with or relate to one another.
```

| action { |  | JSON-object | Refers to VDA5050 action definition. All properties that have the same name are meant to be semantically identical. |
| actionType |  | string | Name of action as described in the VDA5050 specification document (section 6.8.2 in VDA5050 2.0 specification document).  Note: Manufacturer-specific actions can be specified. Such actions must be agreed with the (third-party) fleet control system such as via the interpretation of a mobile robot's factsheet. |
| *actionDescriptor* |  | string | A user-defined, human-readable name or descriptor. This shall not be used for logical purposes. |

> | requirementType |  | string | Enum {REQUIRED, CONDITIONAL, OPTIONAL}  "REQUIRED" – The (third-party) fleet control system must always communicate this action to the mobile robot on this node or edge.  "CONDITIONAL" – The action may or may not be required contingent upon various factors. Discussion between the mobile robot integrator and the (third-party) fleet control system is required.  "OPTIONAL" - The action may or may not be communicated to the mobile robot at the (third-party) fleet control system's discretion and responsibility. The mobile robot must be able to execute without issue if OPTIONAL actions are never, sometimes, or always sent to it.  Note: The LIF does not specify a rigid definition of behavior for anything other than at most one required action. If more than one action is marked as required on a node or edge, it is the responsibility of the mobile robot integrator to define the implications of this to the (third-party) fleet control system, either be it that *all* of the required actions are always required, or that *one* of the actions are always required, or some other combination thereof. |

Author: I do not see what has changed here, nor why it's showing up as part of this PR. Another PR will remove this section anyway. We'll have to keep an eye on the git differ to make sure nothing wonky happens.
